# 3. Numerical Series

- 3.1 Introduction to Series
    
    **3.1.1 Infinite Series**
    Let $\{a_n\}_{n=1}^{\infty}$ be a sequence of real numbers. An *infinite series* is a symbolic expression of the form $a_1 + a_2 + a_3 + a_4 + \cdots = \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n.$
    
    **3.1.3 Partial Sum**
    Given an infinite series $\displaystyle \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$, we define its sequence of partial sums, $\{S_m\}_{m=1}^{\infty}$, as  $S_m \;=\; a_1 + a_2 + \cdots + a_m \;=\; \sum_{n=1}^m a_n$. $S_m$ is called the $m$-th partial sum of the infinite series. Note that $S_m$ is the sum of the initial terms in the sequence $\{a_n\}_{n=1}^{\infty}$ up to (and including) $a_m$.
    
    **3.1.5 Convergence and Divergence**
    We say that an infinite series $\displaystyle \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ converges to $S \in \mathbb{R}$ if $\lim_{m \to \infty} S_m \;=\; \lim_{m \to \infty} \left(\sum_{n=1}^m a_n\right) \;=\; S$. Here, $S$ is called the sum of the infinite series, and we write $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n \;=\; S$. 
    If $\{S_m\}{m=1}^{\infty}$ diverges, then we say that $\displaystyle \sum{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ diverges. Furthermore, if $\lim_{m \to \infty} S_m \;=\; \pm\infty$, then we say that $\displaystyle \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$diverges to $\pm\infty$.
    
    **3.1.10 Geometric Series**
    Let $a, x \in \mathbb{R}$ such that $a \neq 0$. A geometric series is a series of the form $\sum_{n=0}^{\infty} a x^n = a + ax + ax^2 + ax^3 + \cdots$. Here, $a$ is called the first term of the geometric series, and $x$ is called the ratio of the geometric series. We have chosen the convention that for a geometric series, the index $n$ starts at $n = 0$ instead of the usual $n = 1$.
    We define the $m$-th partial sum of the geometric series to be $S_m = \sum_{n=0}^m a x^n = a + ax + ax^2 + \cdots + ax^m.$
    Note that $S_m$ for a geometric series contains $m + 1$ terms instead of the usual $m$ terms. We have chosen the convention that the index $m$ in $S_m$ indicates that the sum stops at the $n = m$ term (and does *not* indicate that the number of terms in $S_m$ is $m$).
    
    **3.1.11 Geometric Series Test**
    Let $\displaystyle \sum_{n=0}^{\infty} a x^n$ be a geometric series, where $a \neq 0$.
    1. If $\lvert x \rvert < 1$, then $\displaystyle \sum_{n=0}^{\infty} a x^n$ converges and $\sum_{n=0}^{\infty} a x^n = \frac{a}{1 - x}$
    2. If $\lvert x \rvert \ge 1$, then $\displaystyle \sum_{n=0}^{\infty} a x^n$ diverges.
    
- 3.2 Arithmetic Properties of Series and the Divergence Test
    
    **3.2.1 Linearity of Infinite Series**
    Suppose that $\displaystyle \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n = A$ and $\displaystyle \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} b_n = B$, where $A, B \in \mathbb{R}$.
    1. For any $c \in \mathbb{R}$, $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} c\,a_n = cA$
    2. $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} (a_n \pm b_n) = A \pm B$
    
    **3.2.2 Tail**
    Given an infinite series $(\displaystyle \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$, let $S_m \;=\; a_1 \;+\; a_2 \;+\; \cdots \;+\; a_m$ denote its $m$-th partial sum. 
    The difference $\Bigl(\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n\Bigr) \;-\; S_m
    \;=\; a_{m+1} \;+\; a_{m+2} \;+\; a_{m+3} \;+\; \cdots
    \;=\; \sum_{n=m+1}^{\infty} a_n$ is called a **tail** of the infinite series $\displaystyle \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$.
    
    **3.2.3 Tail Convergence Theorem**
    Let $\{a_n\}_{n=1}^{\infty}$ be a sequence and let $j$ denote a positive integer.
    1. If $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ converges, then its tail $\sum_{n=j}^{\infty} a_n$ also converges for each $j \ge 1$.
    2. If the tail $\sum_{n=j}^{\infty} a_n$ converges for some $j$, then $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ also converges.
    
    **3.2.4 Tail Divergence Theorem**
    Let $j$ denote a positive integer.
    1. If a tail $\sum_{n=j}^{\infty} a_n$ diverges for some $j$, then the original series $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ diverges too.
    2. If $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$$ diverges, then its tail $\sum_{n=j}^{\infty} a_n$ diverges for each $j \ge 1$.
    
    **3.2.5 Necessary Condition for Convergence**
    If $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ converges, then $\lim_{n \to \infty} a_n = 0$.
    
    **3.2.6 Divergence Test**
    If $\lim_{n \to \infty} a_n \neq 0$, then $\displaystyle \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ diverges.
    
- 3.3 Integral Test
    
    **3.3.1 Positive Series**
    An infinite series $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ is said to be **positive** (or **nonnegative**) if $a_n \ge 0$ for all $n \ge 1$.
    It is said to be **strictly positive** if $a_n > 0$ for all $n \ge 1$.
    It is said to be **eventually positive** (or **eventually nonnegative**) if there is a positive integer $j$ such that $a_n \ge 0$ for all $n \ge j$.
    Finally, it is said to be **eventually strictly positive** if there is a positive integer $j$ such that $a_n > 0$ for all $n \ge j$.
    
    **3.3.2** 
    Let $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ be an eventually positive series. Let $S_m = \sum_{n=1}^{m} a_n$ denote its $m$-th partial sum.
    Then there are only two possibilities:
    1. If the sequence of partial sums $\{S_m\}{m=1}^{\infty}$ is bounded from above, then $\sum{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ converges.
    2. If the sequence of partial sums $\{S_m\}{m=1}^{\infty}$ is not bounded from above, then $\sum{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ diverges to $\infty$.
    
    **3.3.3 Integral Test**
    Suppose that a function $f$ is continuous, positive, and decreasing on the infinite interval $[k, \infty)$ for some positive integer $k$. Then the following statements hold:
    1. If $\displaystyle \int_{k}^{\infty} f(x)\,dx$ converges, then the infinite series $\displaystyle \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} f(n)$ converges.
    2. If $\displaystyle \int_{k}^{\infty} f(x)\,dx$ diverges, then the infinite series $\displaystyle \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} f(n)$ diverges to $\infty$.
    
    **3.3.5 p-Series Test**
    Let *p* be a real number. An infinite series of the form $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} \frac{1}{n^p}$ is called a *p*-series.
    1. If $p > 1$, then the corresponding *p*-series $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} \frac{1}{n^p}$ converges.
    2. If $p ≤ 1$, then the corresponding *p*-series $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} \frac{1}{n^p}$ diverges.
    
    **3.3.7 Integral Test Estimation Theorem**
    Suppose that a function *f* is continuous, positive, and decreasing on the infinite interval $[k, ∞)$ for some positive integer $k$. Further suppose that $\int_k^{\infty} f(x) dx$ converges so that $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} f(n) = S$ for some real number $S$ by the Integral Test. Let $S_m = \sum_{n=1}^{m} f(n)$denote the $m$-th partial sum. Then for any integer $m \geq k$, we have $\int_{m+1}^{\infty} f(x) dx \leq S - S_m \leq \int_m^{\infty} f(x) dx$ .
    
- 3.4 Comparison Test and Limit Comparison Test
    
    **3.4.1 Comparison Test**
    Let $k$ be a positive integer. Suppose that $\{a_n\}_{n=1}^{\infty}$ and $\{b_n\}_{n=1}^{\infty}$ are two sequences satisfying $0 \leq a_n \leq b_n$ for every $n \geq k$.
    1. If $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} b_n$ converges, then $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ converges too.
    2. If $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ diverges, then $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} b_n$ diverges too.
    
    **3.4.3 Limit Comparison Test**
    Let $k$ be a positive integer. Suppose that $\{a_n\}{n=1}^{\infty}$ *and $\{b_n\}{n=1}^{\infty}$* are two sequences satisfying $a_n \geq 0$ and $b_n > 0$ for every $n \geq k$. Let $L = \lim_{n \to \infty} \frac{a_n}{b_n}$. 
    Then there are only four possibilities.
    1. If $0 < L < \infty$, then either $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ and $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} b_n$ both converge or both diverge.
    2. If $L = 0$, then there is a positive integer $j$ such that $a_n < b_n$ for every $n \geq j$. Consequently, if $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} b_n$converges, then $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ converges too. If $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ diverges, then $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} b_n$ diverges too.
    3. If $L = \infty$, then there is a positive integer $j$ such that $a_n > b_n$ for every $n \geq j$. Consequently, if $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ converges, then $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} b_n$ converges too. If $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} b_n$ diverges, then $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ diverges too.
    4. If we know that the limit $L$ does not exist, then no conclusion can be drawn solely from that knowledge.
    
- 3.5 Alternating Series Test
    
    **3.5.1 Alternating Series**
    Let $\{a_n\}_{n=1}^{\infty}$ be a strictly positive sequence, i.e., $a_n > 0$  for each integer $n \geq 1$. An alternating series is an infinite series that is in one of the following two forms:
    1. $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} (-1)^{n-1} a_n = a_1 - a_2 + a_3 - a_4 + \cdots$, or
    2.  $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} (-1)^n a_n = -a_1 + a_2 - a_3 + a_4 - \cdots = -(a_1 - a_2 + a_3 - a_4 + \cdots) = - \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} (-1)^{n-1} a_n$
    
    **3.5.3** 
    An alternating series $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} (-1)^{n-1} a_n$ converges (to a real number $S$) if and only if its negative $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} (-1)^n a_n$ converges (to $-S$).
    
    **3.5.4 Alternating Series Test**
    Let $\{a_n\}_{n=1}^{\infty}$ be a sequence satisfying the following two conditions.
    1. $\lim_{n \to \infty} a_n = 0$. 
    2. There is a positive integer $k$ such that $a_n \geq a_{n+1} > 0$ for every $n \geq k$. In other words, $\{a_n\}_{n=1}^{\infty}$ is eventually decreasing (or eventually non-increasing) and eventually strictly positive.
    Then $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} (-1)^{n-1} a_n$ and $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} (-1)^n a_n$ both converge.
    
    **3.5.7 Alternating Series Estimation Theorem**
    Let $\{a_n\}_{n=1}^{\infty}$ be a sequence that satisfies the hypotheses 1. and 2.  of the Alternating Series Test (Theorem 3.5.4) so that the corresponding alternating series $\sum{n=1}^{\infty} (-1)^{n-1} a_n$ and $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} (-1)^n a_n$ converge to real numbers $S$ and $T$, respectively. Let $S_m = \sum_{n=1}^{m} (-1)^{n-1} a_n$ denote the $m$-th partial sum of $S = \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} (-1)^{n-1} a_n$. Let $T_m = \sum_{n=1}^{m} (-1)^n a_n$ denote the $m$-th partial sum of $T = \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} (-1)^n a_n$. Suppose that $m \geq k$, where $k$ is the positive integer in the hypothesis 2. of the Alternating Series Test. Then we can conclude the following.
    1. $|S - S_m| \leq a_{m+1}$ and $|T - T_m| \leq a_{m+1}$.
    2. If $m$ is even, then $S_m$ is an underestimate of $S$ and $T_m$ is an overestimate of $T$.
    3. If $m$ is odd, then $S_m$ is an overestimate of $S$ and $T_m$ is an underestimate of $T$.
    
- 3.6 Absolute and Conditional Convergence
    
    **3.6.1 Absolute Convergence**
    Given an infinite series $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$, its absolutization is the infinite series $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} |a_n|$. We say that the series $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ converges absolutely if its absolutization $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} |a_n|$ converges.
    
    **3.6.3 Absolute Convergence Test**
    If $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} |a_n|$ converges, then $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ converges.
    
    **3.6.4 Conditional Convergence**
    We say that an infinite series $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ converges conditionally if it converges but its absolutization $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} |a_n|$ diverges.
    
- 3.7 Ratio Test and Root Test
    
    **3.7.1 Ratio Test**
    Let $k$ be a positive integer. Suppose that $\{a_n\}_{n=1}^{\infty}$ is a sequence satisfying $a_n \neq 0$ for every $n \geq k$. Let $L = \lim_{n \to \infty} \left| \frac{a_{n+1}}{a_n} \right|$
    Further, suppose that either $L \in \mathbb{R}$ or $L = \infty$.
    1. If $L < 1$, then $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ converges absolutely.
    2. If $L > 1$ or if $L = \infty$, then $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ diverges.
    3. If we know that $L = 1$, then no conclusion can be drawn solely from that knowledge.
    
    **3.7.5 Root Test**
    Let $L = \lim_{n \to \infty} \sqrt[n]{|a_n|}$, and suppose that $L \in \mathbb{R}$ or $L = \infty$.
    1. If $L < 1$, then $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ converges absolutely.
    2. If $L > 1$ or if $L = \infty$, then $\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$ diverges.
    3. If we know that $L = 1$, then no conclusion can be drawn solely from that knowledge.